In the previous lessons, we've been learning a lot about inheritance and managing our screens using a
UIViewController.
Now, it's finally time to learn about segue,  so that we can navigate between our screens in the storyboard.
Now, when we created our SecondView Controller class entirely from scratch, it gave us a lot of control
and allowed us to show you how we would inherit from UIViewController,
How we could override the viewDidLoad method that came from the UIView Controller, as well as to happen
to properties that come from the UIViewController as well.
And we got to see the class, as well as the object created from the class in their purest forms.
But you saw how much work it was just to create a single label.
Now, imagine if we had to create the entire User Interface.
It would require over 50 lines of code. But luckily for us, there's a much easier way of presenting another
screen. So, let's go ahead and delete our SecondViewController file, and instead, we're going to go to
File, New File. And this time, instead of choosing a Swift file, we're going to choose a Cocoa Touch Class.
Now, Cocoa Touch refers to the framework that Apple has created that include UIKit and a whole bunch
of other libraries that allows us to piggyback off their code, and make our lives a little bit easier.
In this case, the class that we're going to create is gonna be called the ResultsViewController and
it's going to be a SubClass of our UIViewController.
Now, go ahead and click Next,
and then make sure that it gets grouped with the Controllers, and then click Create.
So now you should end up with a new file that already has UIKit imported that already has UIViewController
as the SuperClass that we're inheriting from, and it should also have created the class code
ResultViewController that's inside a file called ResultViewController.swift.
It also got the viewDidLoad already implemented and all we have to do is to delete these comments
and add our own custom code. Just as we have done before where we have our IBOutlets, IBActions, and we link
our design with our code,
I'm going to use this ResultViewController as the code file that's going to control and manage this
screen.
So we've already designed the screen for you. But in order to link it up with this new file, go ahead,
and select it either with this little yellow button here,
alternatively, in the document outline. And then, we're gonna pop open the right-hand pane and go to the
identity inspector which is this one.
Now, we're going to set the class that controls the screen and we're going to start typing results, and
it should, hopefully, pick up on the name of our class here which is ResultViewController, so you can
go ahead and hit enter
once it finds that. You can also click on the dropdown list and try to scroll through this list to find
it as well,
but I find it easier just typing. So now that this is linked up, when we go into the Assistant View, we
should be able to start linking up some IBOutlets, and some IBActions.
Now, occasionally, Xcode doesn't quite pick up on this link as fast as it should do.
So when you select each of these view controllers in the main.Storyboard, it should be automatically
pulling up the linked file.
So in this case, it's the ViewController.swift. But in this case, it's actually hasn't clocked on
yet.
So what we have to do is go to Automatic and select the ResultViewController.
So in your case, you might not have this confusion, and X code is always changing, always trying to improve.
It might be that you don't have this and you see this ResultViewController come up straight away
when you go into assistant view. But at least on my copy at the moment,
this is what I'm seeing.
So this is how you can fix it.
So now that we've got our code file and our design file side by side, let's go ahead and create some
IBOutlets and IBActions.
So the first one that I need a reference to is the place where I'm going to display the BMI value, so
I'm going to create an Outlet here and I'll call that the bmiLabel, and then I'm going to create another
Outlet from this label here which I'll just place below and I'll call that the adviceLabel.
And finally, we're going to create a IBAction from our recalculate button right at the bottom
after viewDidLoad.
So this action is going to be of type UIButton,
so that's the sender data type, and then the name is going to be recalculatePressed.
So that's it.
And we can go into our full screen of ResultViewController.
And now we've got our two IBOutlets and an IBAction and we're able to use the design that we've created
in our Interface Builder.
Now, this might be a good time to also rename our ViewController.swift because it's probably better
if the name tells us straight away which screen its managing in the Main.storyboard. So you can see
that when you select this View Controller Scene and you go into the Identity Inspector, you can see that
this is where that class is showing up.
Now, you could manually go and change the file name, change the class name, and change the name of it in
the Identity Inspector on the Main.storyboard as well, but that's quite a lot of work.
A much easier way of doing this is simply to right-click on the name of the class, View Controller, go
to refactor and rename,
and now Xcode should be able to pick up on all the places where we're using that name View Controller,
including the file name, the commenting, the class name, as well as in the Main..storyboard.
So right here, we're going to change this to the CalculateViewController, and then go ahead and click
rename for all of these places to be changed and updated.
Now, occasionally, Xcode might trip up when you try to rename the name of the file and it doesn't actually
change it over.
So what you can do is you can go to Controller and Show in Finder, and inside that folder, make sure that
the name of the file is CalculateViewController.swift. If not, you can simply just click and then
pause one second, and then click again.
If not, then you can simply just change its name here as well.
And that should fix that problem.
But otherwise, we've now got our two View Controllers each linked to a code file that inherits from
UIViewController.
And this ResultViewController is gonna be the second screen that we want to display onto our app.
Previously, we had to initialize a View Controller manually using our code.
If we go into Main.storyboard, there's actually a much easier way of navigating to the next screen.
We can simply create a segue.
So if you select the CalculateViewController, either in the document outline or this little yellow
circle here in the Main.storyboard and you hold down your control key, then you can click and drag
and point to the ResultViewController, and then let go. And now you're going to select a Segue and
we're going to select Present modally.
Now, the segue is, basically, going to initiate a transition to the next screen.
It's going to display the transition in an animated way and you can choose your animation by simply
selecting that little arrow that is representing the segue, and then change the Transition type, but
we're going to keep everything as the default, and we're going to give this segue an identifier, so a
way of being able to identify it through our code.
And I'm going to call this goToResult.
And now we have a segue which will transition to the next screen and we can trigger it by using that
identifier goToResult. So now if we go ahead and copy this identifier, we don't make any typos in our
code, and we go to our CalculateViewController.swift.
Now, here we're going to delete this line where we create our secondViewController because that doesn't
really exist anymore,
and I'm also going to delete these two lines as well. Instead of all of that,
what we're going to do is we're going to use a method that every UIViewController has,
and we've managed to inherit it by inheriting from UIViewController. So we can tap into our current
CalculateViewController.
And from this view controller, we can trigger the method that's inherited code performSegue.
So it's this one.
And if we go ahead and hit enter, it should insert all of the parameters that we need to fill out.
So in this case, in order to perform a segue, we have to put in the identifier and that's, of course, the
identifier of the segue which you should have copied over, and you need to make sure that it's spelt
exactly the same as what you had in the Main.storyboard right here. And then, we're going to specify
the sender.
So who is going to be the initiator of the segue?
And it's, of course, our CalculateViewController,
so that is, of course, our "self," our CalculateViewController,
the current class. And now if we run our app,
and we click on calculate, you should see that it navigates to the next screen which is our
ResultViewController.
So now it's just a matter of passing over the BMI value. Inside our ResultViewController,
I'm going to create a new variable.
So this is going to be a property of my ResultViewController and I'm going to call it bmiValue and
I'm going to set it as a optional string because, initially, when I create my ResultViewController,
I don't know what the BMI value is going to be.
It's only when I've calculated the BMI, then can I actually pass it over. But now that the segue is responsible
for initializing our ResultViewController and I no longer have to initialize it manually,
well, how can we set the bmiValue property? If you take a look inside the ResultViewController,
notice that when we created it, the template code also included a navigation section that's been commented
out.
You can see here it says that in a storyboard-based application, you'll often want to do a little preparation
before navigation. And this is the method that you need to override in order to run some code just before
the segue initiates,
so in preparation for the segue. And in here, it has a comment that tells us if you want to get hold
of a reference to the new view controller,
well, you can simply use segue.destination. So you can either cut this and copy it over to our
CalculateViewController or you can simply just write "prepare for," and find
"prepare for segue method," and this is going to be a method that we inherit from you UIViewController
which we're going to override.
So inside here, we can tap into the sender.destination, and the sender.destination is going to
be the view controller that will be initialized when the segue gets triggered. In a multiscreen app,
it's more than possible that you could have multiple screens that all originate from one screen.
So let's say that I was to find another view controller and I was to drag it onto the screen, and I also
have a segue from my CalculateViewController to this other view controller.
Well, now I've kind of got two segues,
right?
I've got one that goes here and one that goes here, and they both start from the CalculateViewController.
And when either of those segues are performed, the prepare for segue method will get triggered.
So to be able to differentiate between our segues or at least in a potential future where there
might be a clash, we should first check to see if the segue.identifier is equal to the identifier
that we assigned to the one that goes to the result screen.
This one. So let's check to see if segue.identifier is equal to "goToResult, spelled the exactly the same
way again.
And then, in that case,
well, we know that we've narrowed down on the actual correct segue.
So now what we can do is we can create a reference to that new view controller that's going to be initialized
when the segue gets performed.
So let's create a constant code destinationVC
and we're gonna set it to equal segue.destination.
Now, this destination is the view controller that will be initialized when the segue gets performed,
and it has a type of UIViewController.
So even though we know that for a fact when the goToResult Segue gets triggered, then it's definitely
going to be this one which will initialize a ResultViewController. But if we tried to say
destinationVC.bmiValue, well, we're going to get an error because it says, 'UIViewControllers' don't have
'bmiValue' and, indeed, that is true.
So why is it not picking up on this property that we have in our ResultViewController?
Well, it's because that the segue.destination has a data type of UIViewController and, therefore,
our destinationVC is also a UIViewController,
but the bmiValue only exists within our ResultViewController.
So in order to narrow it down to say that the segwue destination is actually a ResultViewController.
We can say "as!" ResultsViewController. And as soon as we do that, then it recognizes
the bmiValue, and our destinationVC turns into a ResultViewController data type.
So now we can set this bmiValue to "0.0" and all of our code is now error-free.
Now, why is it that we had to do this? And what does it mean when we write "as"? Well, remember that we're
overriding this "prepare for segue" method, and that when Apple created this method, they didn't know that
we were going to create a ResultViewController. We didn't know about a bmiValue that we needed to
set.
So what they've done is that the segue will initialize a box standard UIViewController.
Now, it's our job to narrow down the data type and specify the exact data type that the destination will
be.
So by using this "as" keyword, we are effectively performing something called downcasting. At the moment,
we have a UIViewController which, of course, is the SuperClass of our ResultViewController,
we can cast it down to a ResultViewController by writing the keyword "as." Now, the exclamation mark here
says this is going to be a forced downcast,
so just as when we use the exclamation mark to unwrap optionals, this expresses our certainty that when
the segue is identified its goToResult, then the destination view controller that gets created is
definitely going to be a ResultViewController. So now can you use what you've learned and what you
know to try and get the bmiValue that we calculated inside calculatePressed over into our
prepare for segue, so that we can actually set the destinationVC.bmiValue to the actual calculated value,
rather than just "0.0"? There's a few bits of code that you'll need to change, but the end result
if you're successful is you should be able to change the height and weight toggles, click on calculate,
and you should end up with the actual BMI result being passed over and displayed in this BMI label. Pause
the video and see if you can complete this challenge.
All right.
So at the moment, we know that we've got our BMI being calculated in the calculatePressed IBAction,
but we actually need that value in our "prepare for segue" method.
So how do we move it over?
Well, one of the easiest ways is to simply create a variable in our CalculateViewController, so we can
call it bmiValue and we can set it to start off being equal to "0.0." And then when we calculate
our BMI, we can format it so that we only get it to one decimal place. So we could say bmiValue is equal
to a String that is formatted with this particular format.
So it's gonna be
"%.1f" and then the value that we want to format is of course that bmi floating point number
that we got here.
And so now we've got our bmiValue stored at the top level and we can place it in here as the value
that we'll pass over.
So now when our segue gets triggered, we'll pass over the bmiValue to our destinationVC which is
our ResultViewController and it should land in here.
Now, when this view loads up, we can set the bmiLabel's text property to equal the bmiValue.
Now, if we hit run,
you'll see that our calculated
BMI gets passed over and displayed in our result view controller. So now that you've seen how we can
use these segues to move forwards going from one screen to the next,
how do we go backwards?
How can we dismiss this screen and show the one previous?
So I'm going to delete this view controller because we're only working with these two. And you might
think that the solution is to create a segue wheel this way back, but actually there's a much easier
way.
If you go into your ResultViewController, the time point where we actually want to remove this
ResultViewController from the app, and instead show the previous screen which is our CalculateViewController
is when the user presses the recalculate button.
So inside this IBAction, we can simply tap into a method that, again, comes from our UIViewController
and we can call it by simply writing self.dismiss.
And this will dismiss the current view controller which is, of course, our result view controller.
So if we go ahead and insert that code, we can set the animated property to true, so that the transition
happens in an animated way, and we can set the completion to nil, so that nothing happens after we dismiss
it, we just go back to the previous screen. And if we now run our app,
you can see that we're able to go forwards by clicking on the calculate button which triggers the segue
and go backwards by clicking on the recalculate button which dismisses that second screen,
the ResultViewController.
Now, here's something I want to show you. when we create apps that have multiple screens, what essentially
happens is that the newer screens gets laid on top of the previous screens, like a stack of pancakes.
And if you want to see them in 3D, then you can simply make sure that your app is running, and then click
on this particular icon,
and it will show you what's currently displayed in the app.
But if you click and move, you can see it in 3D.
You can see that our ResultViewController is simply overlaid on top of the CalculateViewController.
So once we dismiss this view controller, then we go back to our previous screen.
You can also see where our labels lie on top.
And relative to other User Interface Elements, there's a really handy way of debugging what's going on
with our UI. So that's just a neat trick. Now that we've figured out how to go forwards by creating a
segue in the storyboard, and then triggering it by calling performSegue which comes from our SuperClass
that we're inheriting the UIViewController, and then we're able to prepare for that segue by setting
some properties in the destination of the segue.
And finally, were able to dismiss the presented view controller by calling the dismiss method which, again,
we have access to because it comes from the UIViewController which we're inheriting from.
Now, of course, Swift is smart enough to know that we're using the dismiss method from this current class.
So in fact, the "self" keyword is not necessary. In some cases, especially when we're creating initializers,
it's quite helpful to use the "self" keyword to make it easier to understand what's going on.
So it's up to you whether if you want to keep it or if you want to simply delete it and keep your code
clean. But that's how we can create segues and how we can go backwards and forwards and navigate
through our multiscreen app.
Now, in the next lesson, we're going to continue building out our app, and we're going to modify more of
our ResultViewController by changing the background color depending on the BMI, changing the advice,
and making our app conform to the MVC design pattern.
So for all of that and more, I'll see you on the next lesson.